---
layout: notes
title: "[C Programming] File I/O"
meta: File I/O operations
reference: 
category: c-programming
---

## fopen 

Open File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
FILE *fopen(const char * restrict filename, const char * restrict mode);
```

- Opens the file whose name is pointed to by 'filename' and associates it with a
stream. 'mode' specifies the mode in which the file is to be opened. Clears the
error and end-of-file indicators for the stream.

- Returns a file pointer to be used when performing subsequent operations on the file.
- Returns a null pointer if the file can't be opened.


## fprintf

Formatted File Write

```c
// <stdio.h> 
int fprintf(FILE * restrict stream, const char * restrict format, ...);
```

- Writes output to the stream pointed to by 'stream'. The string pointed to by
'format' specifies how subsequent arguments will be displayed.

- Returns the number of characters written. 
- Returns a negative value if an error occurs.


## fscanf

Formatted File Read

```c
// <stdio.h> 
int fscanf(FILE * restrict stream, const char * restrict format, ...);
```

- Reads input items from the stream pointed to by 'stream'. The string pointed
to by 'format' specifies the format of the items to be read. The arguments that
follow 'format' point to objects in which the items are to be stored.

- Returns the number of input items successfully read and stored.
- Returns EOF if an input failure occurs before any items can be read.


## fgetc

Read Character from File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
int fgetc(FILE *stream);
```

- Reads a character from the stream pointed to by 'stream'.

- Returns character read from the stream.
- If fgetc encounters the end of the stream, it sets the stream's end-of-file
  indicator and returns EOF.
- If a read error occurs, fgetc sets the stream's error indicator and returns
  EOF.


## fputc

Write Character to File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
int fputc(int c, FILE *stream);
```

- Returns 'c' (the character written).
- If a write error occurs, fputc sets the stream's error indicator and returns
  EOF.


## fgets

Read String from File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
char *fgets(char * restrict s, int n, FILE * restrict stream);
```

- Reads characters from the stream pointed to by 'stream' and stores them in
  the array pointed to by 's'. Reading stops at the first new-line character
  (which is stored in the string), when n - 1 characters have been read, or at
  end-of-file. fgets appends a null character to the string.

- Returns 's' (a pointer to the array in which the input is stored).
- Returns a null pointer if a read error occurs or fgets encounters the end of
  the stream before it has stored any characters.


## fputs

Write String to File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
int fputs(const char * restrict s, FILE * restrict stream);
```

- Writes the string pointed to by 's' to the stream pointed to by 'stream'.

- Returns a nonnegative value if successful.
- Returns EOF if a write error occurs.


## fread

Read Block from File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
size_t fread(void * restrict ptr, size_t size, size_t nmemb, 
    FILE * restrict stream);
```

- Attempts to read 'nmemb' elements, each 'size' bytes long, from the stream
  pointed to by 'stream' and store them in the array pointed to by 'ptr'.

- Returns the number of elements actually read. (This number will be less than
  'nmemb' if fread encounters end-of-file or a read error occurs.
- Returns zero if either 'nmemb' or 'size' is zero.


## fwrite

Write Block to File

```c
// <stdio.h> 
size_t fwrite(const void * restrict ptr, size_t size, size_t nmemb,
    FILE * restrict stream);
```

- Writes 'nmemb' elements, each 'size' bytes long, from the array pointed to by
  'ptr' to the stream pointed to by 'stream'.

- Returns the number of elements actually written. (This number will be less
  than 'nmemb' if a write error occurs.
- In C99, returns zero if either 'nmemb' or 'size' is zero.


## getc

Read Character from File

```c
// <stdio.h>
int getc(FILE *stream);
```

- Reads a character from the stream pointed to by 'stream'. (Note: getc is
  normally implemented as a macro; it may evaluate 'stream' more than once.

- Returns the character read from the stream. 
- If getc encounters the end of the stream, it sets the stream's end-of-file
  indicator and returns EOF.
- If a read error occurs, getc sets the stream's error indicator and returns
  EOF.


## putc

Write Character to File

```c
// <stdio.h>
int putc(int c, FILE *stream);
```

- Writes the character 'c' to the stream pointed to by 'stream'. (Note: putc is
  normally implemented as a macro; it may evaluate the 'stream' more than
  once.)

- Returns 'c' (the character written).
- If a write error occurs, putc sets the stream's error indicator and returns
  EOF.


## foef

Test for End-of-File

```c
// <stdio.h>
int feof(FILE *stream);
```

- Returns a nonzero vlue if the end-of-file indicator is set for the stream
  pointed to by 'stream'.
- Returns zero otherwise.


## ferror 

Test for File Error

```c
// <stdio.h>
int ferror(FILE *stream);
```

- Returns a nonzero value if the error indicator is set for the stream pointed
  to by 'stream.
- Returns zero otherwise.
