---
layout: notes
title: "[C Programming] scanf()"
meta: Important facts about the 'scanf' function
reference: 
category: c-programming
---

## How scanf() Works with the White-Space Characters

White-space characters include the space, horizontal and vertical tab,
form-feed, and new-line characters.

For each conversion specification in the format string, scanf() tries to locate
an item of the appropriate type in the input data, skipping blank space
(white-space characters) if necessary.
```c
int i, j;
scanf("%d%d", &i, &j);
/*
 * Valid input may be,
 *    - 10 20
 *    -     10 20
 *    - 10    20
 *    - 10
 *        20
 *
 * Invalid input may be,
 *    - 10,20
 *    - 10 / 20
 */
```

A non-white-space character other than % matches the same character in the
input stream.

```c
int i, j;
scanf("%d/%d", &i, &j);
/*
 * Valid input may be,
 *    - 10/20
 *    -     10/20
 *    - 10/   20
 *    - 10/
 *        20
 * 
 * Invalid input may be,
 *    - 10 /20
 *    - 10 /    20
 *    - 10 /
 *        20
 */
```
- For example, input stream ' 10 /20' won't match the format string "%d/%d".
    1. scanf() skips one space
    2. matches %d with 10
    3. then, attempts to match the / in the format string with a space in the
       input
    4. there's no match, so scanf() puts the space back (the ' /20' characters
       remain to be read by the next call of scanf())
- To allow spaces after the first number, the format string "%d /%d" should
  be used instead

One or more consecutive white-space characters in a scanf() format string match
zero or more white-space characters in the input stream. 
```c
int i, j;
scanf("%d /%d", &i, &j);
/*
 * Valid input may be,
 *    - 10/20
 *    -     10/20
 *    - 10 /20
 *    - 10    /    20
 *
 * Invalid input may be,
 *    - 10,20
 *    - 10 , 20
 */ 
```

## Reading Strings Using scanf()

The %s conversion specification allows scanf() to read a string into a character
array:

```c
char str[50] = { 0 };
scanf("%s", str);
```
When scanf() is called, it skips white space, then reads characters and stores
them in str until it encounters a white-space character. scanf() always stores
a null character at the end of the string.

A string read using scanf() will never contain white space. Consequently,
scanf() won't usually read a full line of input; a new-line character will 
cause scanf() to stop reading, but so will a space or tab character.

To read an entire line of input at a time, gets() might be a better choice.
